A lot of amazing answers have been given to this question but I’m just going to put my two cents.

These are the tricks that I use when I have to memorize, process and retain a lot of complex information, especially if it involves complicated words.

Reading and then writing down the important points in a bullet format. This process helps me a lot as I am forced to process the information and convey it in a concise manner.
Revision is super important! When preparing for exams, I will always revise the last day’s notes before I go to sleep. Then at the end of the week, I will revise notes from that entire week (making bullet points pays off). This just marks the information permanently in my brain. I feel that the more you revise, the more you retain.
Speaking it out aloud. It might feel weird, but when I am trying to process a difficult concept, I speak it out loud as if I am explaining it to someone. That is also the reason why mentors benefit from having mentees. If you are able to explain something complex to someone that knows much lesser than you, you’re probably going to remember that concept for a long time.
Making diagrams. I am a very visual person. So if I’m trying to memorize a cell-signaling pathway, I would make a diagram of it. Images stick to the memory more than chunks of text.
This one would sound even stranger (literally)! If I’m trying to memorize a difficult word, I like to pronounce it funny. Pronouncing it weirdly makes it memorable for me. For example, when I was younger, the spelling of diarrhoea (British English) always confused me. So I would pronounce it as diarr-hoe-eeaa and I never messed up its the spelling again. Of course, I wasn’t doing this in front of others, it was just for my benefit.
An important part of the GRE exam is to have an extensive vocabulary. Now that’s just a huge amount of words and their meanings to memorize. So I would follow point 2 and also make funny sentences using those words. Somehow, weird things are more memorable than normal things.
In addition to point 5, I would make weird sentences using that word AND its synonyms and antonyms. That way, I would memorize not only the word but also be able to recollect it if I saw its synonyms and antonyms. For example- His ostentatious, pretentious, vulgar ways made his restrained and modest neighbors jealous.
